Nonsense Literature

Nonsense literature is a category of literary works which contain an abundance of nonsensical techniques and devices, such as gibberish, coined words, absurd imagery and an overall perceived lack of meaning. Just like the works belonging to this genre, the task of defining nonsense appears deceivingly simple. A dictionary would straightforwardly define it as “the lack of sense”, easy enough to understand, until you must define the word “sense” and eventually end up with the task of finding the meaning of “meaning”. We all naturally learn the meaning of meaning, and we all have the same understanding of it, yet the difficulty in defining it creates subjectivity. Nonsense literature is not meaningless. It is overflowing with undefined meaning, which causes its readers to each have a unique interpretation of it. Interpretation is defined as “the action of explaining the meaning of something”. When we find it difficult to interpret something, we tend to assume that there is a lack of meaning behind it, instead of assuming that its meaning cannot be interpreted. Thus, in the early days of nonsense literature, its audience was split into two categories: children and common people who saw it as a source of entertainment; and philosophers who were trying to find the limits of human rationality.

Nonsense literature as we know it appeared in the 19th century. Possibly the most influential authors of the genre were Lewis Carroll and Edward Lear. Lewis Carroll’s well-known works, Jabberwocky and Alice in Wonderland made the genre into a children’s favourite. So did Lear’s limericks, through their short, comical and satisfying verses. The Victorians did not consider their works anything but some rather sophisticated form of children’s literature, and nonsense was not even recognised as a genre at the time. The fascination with the inner workings of nonsense would come later, with scholars and critics of the 20th century analysing it to an extent that most Victorians and even Carroll and Lear would have found absurd, with statements such as “Verbal nonsense is in the truest sense a metaphysical endeavour, a striving to enlarge and to transcend the limits of the material universe and logic.” by Martin Esslin. Whether or not that is what Lear and Carroll intended to do through their work is irrelevant, because as stated before, the difficulty in interpreting nonsense literature creates a subjectivity which causes it to have many different interpretations, all of which are equally correct, or incorrect. The problem with this is that some critics will try to pass their interpretation as fact, when in truth, it is nothing more than an opinion. This would lead to Carroll and Lear’s works being ensnared into various political, social and allegorical narratives by those trying to interpret them.

Those who were not content with the variability of explanations tried to find the absolute true interpretation of nonsense works through the psychoanalysis of their authors, something which Roland Barthes argued against, in his essay The Death of the Author, first published in English in the Aspen Magazine in 1967. This essay is most appropriate when considered in relation with nonsense literature. Barthes argues that the writer’s only task is to produce the work, not to explain it. By assigning a singular interpretation to a text, is to limit it, and the “meaning” of a text could only be given by the impression of its reader. Critics who would interpret Carroll’s work based on his personal life would find themselves going back and forth making assumptions about his life based on his writings. These assumptions would often turn into accusations, such as critic Edmund Miller accusing Lear of being obsessed with genitalia. 

The genre of nonsense should not be confused with that of fantasy. Although both feature fantastic creatures and worlds, fantasy literature still follows a set of rules, while nonsense does not. Fantasy often has a predictable narrative structure and themes, while the themes of nonsense are either subjective or beyond our comprehension. Nonsense also must be distinguished from riddles or gibberish. A riddle is only nonsensical until the answer is found. Although gibberish is often present in nonsense works, this genre is usually coherent and adheres to the rules of language. In terms of syntactic structure, each word can be attributed a part of speech. In terms of phonetics, even the coined words are easily pronounced. It is only when considering semantics that nonsense differentiates itself from other genres. Nouns, adjectives and verbs are used in unexpected ways, and the act of “saying” separates from the act of “meaning”. PhD Lisa Susan notes in her dissertation that nonsense literature is a product of play. It is a spontaneous, an impulsive action where the author allows themselves to be absorbed into their own world on paper. This state of play ranges from the almost unconscious surrender of oneself to the act of writing in the case of Lear, to Carroll’s sophisticated and conscious satisfaction of creating complex fantastic worlds. 

Most types of poetry can easily be adapted into songs. Nonsense is a genre celebrated for its musicality, as it gives the author the freedom and a facility to create rhymes and reconstruct language to their desire. It is no surprise that nonsense has become an integral part of music. For a long time, musicians have been using language as an instrument, disregarding semantics in favour of phonetics. As such, plenty of nonsense elements can be found in today’s music, from blues scatting, to pop singers’ “yeah, yeah”, to a rapper’s ad-lib onomatopoeia. Despite this, there are not many popular, truly nonsensical songs. Artists such as Bob Dylan, John Lennon and Talking Heads expressed interest in nonsense. Talking Heads released “I Zimbra”, a single which contained gibberish lyrics inspired by Dadaism, an artistic movement which also used elements of nonsense, though these were charged with political meaning. Robert Wyatt, a fan of limericks, is an artist who has consistently produced nonsense lyrics which truly fit into the genre. Two notable examples are the songs “Alifib” and “Alifie”. 

The genre of nonsense literature is a perpetual contradiction. Works in this genre are brimmed with a fluidity of meaning which suddenly evaporates once you try to impose a fixed interpretation on it. For years, its importance had been overlooked and diminished to nothing more than children’s rhymes, but nonsense is one of the few genres which challenged literature and the act of writing on a profound philosophical and linguistic level.


Bibliography:
Philosophy of Nonsense – Jean-Jacques Lecercle
The Nonsense Literature of Edward Lear and Lewis Carroll – Lisa Susan
Death of the Author – Roland Barthes
Litpop: Writing and Popular Music – Rachell Carroll, Adam Hansen
The Field of Nonsense – Elizabeth Sewell
Alice's Adventures in Wonderland – Lewis Carroll
A Book of Nonsense – Edward Lear
